# JavaScript object shapes

JavaScript engines optimize memory using object shapes to track what properties they have.

**Problem**

How can we reduce memory usage when dealing with **N objects** that have **the same keys** but different values.

**Solution**

We maintain the representation of created objects using shapes and pointers to them.

There is also _Property information_ containing metadata about the shape. If you wonder what information is stored there, see API for
[Object.seal()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/seal), [Object.freeze()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/freeze).

{% include img.html url="/assets/posts/js_shapes.png" caption="Source: JavaScript Engines: The Good Parts™ by Mathias Bynens & Benedikt Meurer" %}

**What about assigning new properties?**


When objects are getting modified, JavaScript engines extend the existing shape by creating a new branch.


{% include img.html url="/assets/posts/js_shapes_ext.png" caption="Source: JavaScript Engines: The Good Parts™ by Mathias Bynens & Benedikt Meurer" %}


**Conclusion**

The way how we create JavaScript objects have impact on the runtime. Be good citizen and initialize your objects in one go.
There is a lot going on under the hood when JavaScript is executed.

I highly recommend to watch the talk and look into JavaScript engine internals.


# References

Go watch the talk about [JavaScript Engines: The Good Parts™](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5nmpokoRaZI){: target="_blank" rel="nofollow } by Mathias Bynens & Benedikt Meurer.